Exploring an IFC model
======================

We're going to load an existing IFC model and explore some common properties
most users will be interested in.

If you don't have an IFC model available, here's a small one for your
convenience provided by the Institute for Automation and Applied Informatics
(IAI) / Karlsruhe Institute of Technology.  It's in German, so you may need to
use some creativity when reading the data :)

.. container:: blockbutton

    `Download sample IFC <https://www.ifcwiki.org/images/e/e3/AC20-FZK-Haus.ifc>`__

.. seealso::

    You can find more sample models online in the `OSArch Open Data Directory
    <https://wiki.osarch.org/index.php?title=AEC_Open_Data_directory>`__

Loading a model
---------------

Blender's interface is divided into panels. The main **Viewport** panel shows 3D
geometry.  The top right **Outliner** panel shows a tree of geometric objects.
The bottom right **Properties** panel shows data and relationships.

.. image:: blenderbim-layout.png

The **Properties** panel has tabs to switch between different types of
properties. Make sure you have the **Scene Properties** tab activated, and find
the **IFC Project** subpanel. Click on the **Load Project** and browse to your
``.ifc`` file.

.. image:: properties-loadproject.png

After loading, you will see the model appear in the **Viewport** panel.

.. image:: example-project.png

Let's take a look at the **IFC Project** subpanel again. It shows the loaded
filename, as well as the **IFC Schema**. There are two commonly seen **IFC
Schema** versions: IFC2X3 and IFC4. Checking the **IFC Schema** is important
because it has an impact on what BIM data may be stored. IFC4 is the newer
version and it is recommended to use IFC4 models as it has significantly more
BIM capabilities compared to IFC2X3. 

.. tip::

   Blender's interface is highly customisable. Panels, panel types, colours,
   sizes, and tabs may be edited to suit your workflow. If you want a `Hot Pink
   theme <https://github.com/kame404/Blender-Themes>`__ look no further.

Navigating a model in 3D
------------------------

To navigate, can use the **Navigate Gizmo** on the top right corner of the
**Viewport** panel. Click and drag on the coloured axes to **Orbit**, click and
drag on the magnifying glass to **Zoom**, and click and drag on the hand icon to
**Pan**.  You can also click on the grid icon to switch between perspective and
orthographic view.

To switch to a top view, front view, or side view, click the relevant axis on
the **Navigate Gizmo**.

.. image:: navigate-gizmo.png

You can also use your mouse to navigate. Hover your mouse over the **Viewport**
panel and click and drag the Middle Mouse Button (``MMB``) to **Orbit**. Scroll
the mousewheel to **Zoom**, and use ``Shift-MMB`` to **Pan**.

If you have a numpad, you can use the numpad keys to quickly switch to top,
front, or side view. Use ``7`` for top view, ``1`` for front view, and ``3`` for
side view.

.. warning::

   Blender's hotkeys are context sensitive. This means that a hotkey has a
   different meaning depending on the panel your mouse cursor is hovering over.
   If you press ``7`` to go to top view, make sure your mouse cursor is over the
   **Viewport** panel. Be very careful where your mouse is, or you might press a
   hotkey and it will have unintended consequences!

If you click on an object, such as a wall in the **Viewport** panel, you can
zoom to the selected object by clicking on ``View > Frame Selected``. The hotkey
is the ``.`` button on the numpad. After zooming into an element, when you
**Orbit** the 3D view will rotate around the center of that element.

You can also zoom to all objects in the project by clicking on ``View > Frame
All``.

.. image:: frame-selected.png

Another good way to navigate is by flying or walking around similar to a video
game. Choose ``View > Navigation > Walk Navigation``, or use the ``Shift-```
hotkey (the backtick key is usually to the left of the number 1 on the
keyboard). With **Walk Navigation** enabled, use the ``WASD`` keys and the mouse
to move around like a video game. You can use the ``Shift`` key to switch
between moving fast and slow. If you scroll with the mousewheel, it will adjust
the speed that you move at.

Sometimes, you want to look through objects. You can toggle **X-Ray Mode** by
pressing the button on the top right of the **Viewport** panel. The hotkey is
``Alt-Z``.

.. image:: x-ray-mode.png

.. tip::

   Blender has lots of hotkeys to do things quickly. These can take time to
   learn but it is worth it as you will be much faster. These hotkeys can be
   customised in Blender's preferences.


Overview of all objects
-----------------------

The **Outliner** panel on the top right shows a hierarchy of all the currently
loaded physical **Objects** in your IFC project. These **Objects** correlate to
what you can see in the **Viewport** panel.

Every **Object** in the **Outliner** represents an IFC **Element**. These
**Objects** have a name with the pattern ``Class/Name``. The class prefix
represents the type of object, and the name is the name of the object.  Examples
of classes you will see are ``IfcBuilding``, or ``IfcWall``. This naming
convention makes it easy to quickly spot types of objects.

.. image:: outliner.png

Objects are organised in a hierarchy. By default, this hierarchy represents a
breakdown of spaces, from large spaces such as a site and a building, down to
smaller spaces like building storeys and room spaces. The hierarchy will always
begin with an **IfcProject** object. You can click on the triangle to toggle the
hierarchy.

.. tip::

   In large projects with deep hierarchies, you can ``Shift-LMB`` click the
   triangle to recursively toggle the hierarchy. You can also click and drag the
   ``MMB`` to pan left and right.

When there are lots of objects, you can type a name in the filter box to quickly
identify objects by name or type.

.. image:: outliner-filter.png

Clicking on an object in the **Outliner** panel also selects the corresponding
object in the **Viewport** panel. A good strategy to find objects is to then use
``View > Frame Selected`` to zoom to it in the **Viewport**.

The **Outliner** panel is also great for isolating portions of your project. You
can include and exclude portions by clicking on the **Tick Icon** next to
collections of objects in the hierarchy.

Let's isolate a single building storey. Start by disabling the **Tick Icon**
next to the **IfcProject** collection. This will hide everything in the project.
Then navigate through the hierarchy and enable the **Tick Icon** next to an
**IfcBuildingStory**.

.. image:: outliner-isolate.png

Viewing element classes
-----------------------

Usually the first thing you'll want to check is the **Class** of element that an
object represents. The IFC **Class** is an international classification system
provided by IFC. Example IFC **Classes** are Wall, Slab, and Door. Every IFC
element must have a **Class**.

**Classes** aren't just for categorising elements. They also indicate what types of
properties and relationships it is allowed to have. For example, a Wall
**Class** can have a fire rating property, but a Grid **Class** cannot.

.. note::

   There are hundreds of **Classes** to represent all aspects of our built
   environment, including non geometric classes like Task, Occupant, and CostItem.
   However, we'll focus only on simple physical **Classes** in this guide. Don't
   worry about memorising all the available **Classes**, you'll get a feel for them
   as you explore more.

To view an object's class, click on an object in the **Viewport** or **Outliner**
panel, then switch to the **Object Properties** tab in the **Properties** panel.
You can see the **Class** name in the **IFC Class** subpanel.

.. image:: element-class.png

In this case, the **Class** of our roof is an **IfcSlab**. You'll notice this is
the same **Class** name used as a prefix for the object name in the **Outliner**
panel. You can also see the name of the actively selected object in the top left
of the **Viewport** panel.

.. warning::

   Not all IFC models use the correct **Class**. For example, a chair might be assigned
   as the Wall **Class** instead the Furniture **Class**. There is a special
   class known as **IfcBuildingElementProxy**, used when the user is unable to
   find a more semantic **Class**. If you see many **IfcBuildingElementProxy**
   **Classes**, it is likely a symptom of a low quality IFC model. If this is
   the case, scold the project manager and ask them to do a better job.

After **IfcSlab** it also says **ROOF**. This is known as the
**Predefined Type** of the element. You can think of it as a further level of
classification. In this case, it distinguishes our object as a roof slab,
compared to other types of slabs. The **Predefined Type** is optional so you may
not see it all the time.

Press the **Select Icon** to select all objects that are of the same
**IfcSlab** **Class**. Then, you can isolate these elements by going to ``Object
> Show/Hide > Hide Unselected`` (hotkey ``Shift-H``). To show all elements again, you can use
``Object > Show/Hide > Show Hidden Objects`` (hotkey ``Alt-H``). If you want to
hide elements instead, you can use ``Object > Show/Hiden > Hide Selected``
(hotkey ``H``).

.. image:: element-class-select.png

.. note::

   Remember that Blender's hotkeys are context sensitive. Make sure your mouse
   is hovering over the **Viewport** panel when you press a hotkey or no cake
   for you.

You can also see statistics about the number of selected objects. If you right
click on the bottom right status bar and enable **Scene Statistics** you will
see information like **Objects 4/4**, which means that 4 objects are selected
out of 4 available objects. This is a great way of counting objects like toilets.

.. image:: scene-statistics.png

Viewing attributes and properties
---------------------------------

TODO

Viewing construction types
--------------------------

TODO

Viewing materials
-----------------

TODO
